---
layout: post
title: Relational vs Non-relational Database
category: article
tags:
- hack reactor
- coding
- challenges
- archives
- javascript
---
<p>
Relational data is tabular in nature- and is usually stored
in Tables, with rows and columns.A schema can contain many 
tables, that can be inter-connected to for relational schema.
Non-relational data, on the other hand, is grouped together in 
chunks. Non-relational data is often stored as Collections, like
in documents, key-value pairs. Data-the nature of the data, and it's 
usage will determine the choice
of Schema.
</p>

If you want to create structured data sets, and data modelling
is the key criteria, then SQL is the best choice for that.
Non-relational data, on the other hand, thrives on dynamic schemas 
and is often referred to as unstructured data. Non-relational data can 
easily accommodate changes in data type/structure due to its dynamic schema 
support.

Scalability

One of the key differences between the two is scalability. To support more 
concurrent usage, SQL databases scale vertically, to do this more computaional
power needs to be added to the machine. While SQL databases can scale insanely high, e
ventually there will be an upper limit to vertically scalability. NoSQL databases, on the other hand, 
scale horizontally. Non-relational data storage being inherently distributed in nature, scalability 
for NoSQL databases is achieved horizontally by adding more commodity database servers to share the load.

Transactional vs Scale

If your data operations demand high transactional rates or complex data queries needing control over execution 
plans, SQL database can be the best fit. SQL databases allow fine-grained control over transactional atomicity, 
and easy rollbacks. While NoSQL databases can be used for transactional operations, they really shine with pure 
scale of operation and quantity of data.

Big Data

Big Data- enormous quantities of semi-structured data entities generated by machines or our society every day.  
The NoSQL, schema-less approach to data management and the infinite, horizontal scaling is potentially the only way 
to fathom how to capture, curate, search, analyze and visualize big data.

ACID OR CAP

SQL databases have been long renowned to maintain integrity through what’s called the ACID (Atomic | Consistence | 
Isolated | Durable ) properties.The goal is to support isolated indivisible transactions whose changes are
 persisted and leave the data in a consistent state.NoSQL databases, on the other hand, make you choose between any 
two priorities per the CAP (Consistency | Availability | Partition Tolerance )
 theorem, since all three are difficult to achieve in a distributed node-based system.

Relational vd Non-Relational: Both have pros and cons, and the right architecture depends on the requirements of the applications 
you build. Good 'ol SQL can seem fullfill all the requirements you have, choose NoSQL options when you are nearing the fringe 
limitations of relational databases and the vastness of your data handling or scale of operations simply demands a more distributed system.
